{
    "title": "Learning Scala",
    "author": "Martin Maillard",
    "date": "2012-11-11",
    "categories": ["programming"]
}
-----

Learning Scala
==============

For the past seven weeks, I have been following a course on the Scala language
on [coursera.org](http://coursera.org), given by Martin Odersky, creator of the
language and professor at EPFL (Ecole polytechnique fédérale de Lausanne).

Scala is a general purpose language built on the JVM that mixes aspects of
object-oriented and functional languages. It is very well integrated within
the Java ecosystem and can thus take advantage of all the existing Java
libraries.

As I have been playing with Haskell for several months and using basic
clojure to play [live coding music](http://overtone), I am not totally new to
the concepts of functionnal programming. I also took a course on Prolog during
my Bachelor, which first introduced me to pattern matching and heavy use of
recursion. I had however never read or written any Scala code before.

This was also my first experience on coursera.org. The concept of this website
still amazes me. I'm more and more convinced that this kind of tool/entity will
have a significant role in the evolution of our education systems. But that's
not the topic of this post.

The course was composed of one chapter per week, each one covering a chunk of
related concepts. This structure reminded me of the way courses were usually
layed out during my studies. If I am not mistaken, this is actually the way
this course is given at EPFL. Despite a steady pace, the lectures were easy to
follow and the assignements were well designed to help grasping the concepts
presented by directly applying them. This may however have been more difficult
for someone totally new to them. As for the schedule, the only thing I was not
entirely pleased with was the way the deadlines for the assignements where set.
The allotted time didn't seem to be consistent from week to week and it has not
always been easy to deliver on time (in fact I missed the date twice, which
resulted in a penalty on my grade).

So what did I like about Scala ?

Obviously, it provides very powerful features, while not making the transition
too painful for a Java programmer. It plays very well with the Java ecosystem
and makes it possible to use all the existing third party libraries. This may
seem like a detail, but I think that has played/will play a significant role in
the adoption of the language. And finally something that has more to do with my
personnal experience: due to the "inpute" nature of the language, the edges of
the program, where all the "badness happens" (side-effects), seem to be
implemented in a much more natural way than they would be in Haskell (but
that's probably because I don't have enough experience with Monads yet).

And what did I not like about Scala ?

Scala is often described as a "better Java". I don't question that, but the
similarities between the two languages seem to be what makes Scala less
appealing to me. While Haskell feels clean, elegant and robust, Scala fells a
little more sloppy. I put that down to my lack of experience with mixing
Object-Oriented and Functionaly, that I tend to use quite liberally. More
discipline could probably reduce this feeling. I will have to check out some
Scala codebases for some idiomatic Scala.

Overall, this was a very enjoyable experience that I will probably reconduct in
the future. Scala is definitely an amazing tool that will come in handy if I
ever have the constraint of using the JVM. However, for the moment I'm going
back to learning Haskell, and enventually build something tangible and usefull
with it.

An interesting thing is that the more I study powerful languages, the less I
find myself enclined to use Java or C# if I don't have to. Python is still my
language of choice, we'll see how that turns out. I hope we will soon see a
questionning in the software industry regarding their choices. Next up,
[Go](http://golang.org) ?
